hi everybody it's time for another
planetarium show and this one is based
on the night sky from Cambridge in
January of
2025 so I've set this up and used the
stellarium software uh which I've then
programmed a great big script to take us
through the night sky from um the sunset
through to Sunrise later on and show you
just some of the most interesting
objects that are around so the date is
set I think to the 22nd of January and
um that's a little bit in advance of
where it is where I'm recording it but
uh here we go so we started off with the
sun in the afternoon over the Cambridge
Countryside there um low in the sky at
this time of year of course and I'm
going to set time running forward and to
do that we just uh kick the system off
and uh the sun will then scroll across
and head down towards the um Eastern
Horizon and here we go as it does so it
will move and the sky will gradually
begin to reveal the colors of sunset so
can see that starting at the bottom
there and as the sun gets lower in the
sky we will get to much
more uh orange yellows Reds even and the
sky above becomes darker and darker so
there we go we'll just pause that just
as the Sun is setting and I want to
visit the first object on my tour and
that is very very bright at the moment
it's the planet Venus you go out after
sunset at the moment you can't miss it
it'll be the first thing you see very
bright in the southwest roughly half the
planet has turned towards the sun there
um and half we we're observing the dark
side so if you look through telescope
you will see a half phase to it um of
course Venus is very shiny it has a very
thick atmosphere um and being close to
the Sun it receives a lot of light so it
bounces a lot of that back to us and
that accounts for the extraordinary
brightness in the sky it's been quite
stunning over the last few nights which
have been clear for me so that's been
fantastic and I hope to do some more
observing uh through the rest of the
month so that's the planet Venus Mercury
we can't see it's too close to the Sun
in the sky at the moment so we uh can't
bring that into the tour so I'm going to
pull right back and then let time run
forward again so the Sun is going to set
Venus following it downwards and the sky
will gradually get darker and as it does
so we should start to see the first
Stars appearing so here we go here's the
beginning of the uh view of the night
sky for us and we'll stop there pull
back and get a whole view of the sky
above
us and pick out one or two of the
constellations so we've got Aquarius and
Andromeda there marked out there's
pereus
copia and then
Pisces
Aries
Taurus Gemini
and I think we're going to put cancer on
the screen there over of course those
that make that row across the bottom
there are the constellations of the
ecliptic we got Orion there always
always very prominent at this time of
year and of course the Great Bear and
the little bear Ursa Major and Ursa
Minor that orange line that's the path
of the planets the ecliptic the path of
the sun across the sky and we'll come
back to that as we look at some of the
planets but first of all we're going to
zoom in on the Big Dipper the plow The
Great Bear Ura major so this is the
whole constellation it's very large
there's the artwork for the bear
itself now there's something rather
wrong with this bear its tail is way
longer than is anatomically correct so I
think when the Ancients made this up
they probably hadn't really studied a
bear at close range perhaps that's not a
sensible thing to do in the middle of
the tail we've got a a star misar and
its companion Alor these are both um
visible to the naked eye but if you zoom
in with a powerful telescope it reveals
that both misar and Alor are indeed
double Stars so you have two pairs of
double stars all in orbiting around each
other making up a quadruple star system
it's one of the only double Stars you
can see with the naked
eye just away from that we have the
first Galaxy of ourour this is the pin
wheel Galaxy there face on towards us
showing that classic spiral structure
with the nucleus looking a little bit
orange in the middle and the more Bluey
white color of the Spiral arms stretched
out that's very nice through a telescope
very easy to
find just off the tail of the Great Bear
now if we go the opposite direction down
away from the The Great Bear just below
it
we'll find another galaxy um and this
one is called the whirlpool Galaxy one
of my favorite objects to track
down this is in fact again a spiral
galaxy face on but it's in the process
of devouring a small dwarf Galaxy that's
come too close to it and that's the
object at the top there you can see all
the disruption of clouds of stars being
hurled in different directions by the
gravitational slingshot caused by these
two interacting with each other so
that's the whirlpool Galaxy
M51 in Charles messier's catalog now
we're going to move over to a different
type of object this is a planetary
nebula nothing to do with planets just
looks a bit round and Blobby in a bad
telescope when you look at it properly
you see it's an exploding star it's
puffed off an outer layer of uh gas and
dust and the colors tell us what
elements are present in that star and
it's leaving behind a white dwarf in the
center a little tiny dead
Remnant it's the owl nebula it looks a
little bit like an owl when you look
through a telescope here's a Galaxy
another one this one's a bit more Edge
on and further away 45 million light
years some people call this the
surfboard Galaxy for obvious reasons and
again you've got that blue color in the
outer regions and the more orange and
white in the center where the nucleus
is we're going to pull back and move to
a different area again not too far from
Ura major just up above it where there's
a nice little group of galaxies that we
always include on our open observing
nights this one is bod's Galaxy Messier
object 81 a nice spiral galaxy
reasonably bright and easy to find and
just next to it there are three other
small Galaxy galaxies there too at the
bottom and this one and this one the
cigar
Galaxy very much a spiral but Edge on
and has a lot of activity going on it's
a star burst uh with lots of new stars
being formed and there are these two
Jets of hydrogen gas being hurled out of
the center what's happened here is is
about 6 million years ago that came too
close to bod's Galaxy and had a bit of a
a train wreck with it a bit of a nasty
gravitational disturbance and it's
twisted and distorted the cigar
Galaxy okay so now we've left Ursa Major
Great Bear and gone over to Ursa Miner
the little bear this has an even more
ridiculously long
tail and you see the stick diagram there
there's the little poor little bear with
his Great Bear companion on the edge of
the
screen and the little bear has a very
important star at the tip of the tail
there that's the pole star the North
Star Polaris you can zoom in on it it
just so happens that at the moment it's
very very close to being perfectly
aligned with the rotation axis of the
earth and so whilst uh the Earth turns
all the stars seem to move but Polaris
seems to stay still hovering directly
above the North Pole here we go what I'm
doing is running time backwards and
forwards here letting the sky rotate and
you can see Polaris staying still while
all the other stars rotate around it um
and so all I'm doing here is playing
with the time and U moving it forwards
now what's going to happen is it's going
to get to a certain point here we go and
reverse it and go back the other way uh
and get back to where I started that
helps me not get confused about which
way up things are but uh it's just
illustrating the point that this Sky
seems to rotate around
Polaris Polaris is also a very special
kind of star it's a seid variable so a
Yellow Giant star that pulsates
regularly and this regularity discovered
by Henrietta levit Swan is a a very
useful trick for finding distance
because from the period of pulsation we
can know how massive and how bright the
star truly is and from how bright it
appears to be we can calculate the
distance uh so it's a very good Cosmic
yard stick now we've moved over back to
the uh where we have the next planet on
our tour and that is the planet Saturn
with its rings and
moons this is the sort of scale of view
you would get with an amateur 6 or 8 in
telescope you'd see the dis of the
planet the Rings and a few of the Moon
moons um the more powerful your
telescope the more moons you tend to be
able to see but at the moment the Rings
are getting to a very very thin Edge on
almost aspect from the line of sight
from Earth and they will go completely
Edge on and disappear they're very very
thin indeed and so when they're
completely Edge on we just can't see
them but that's nearly the case now the
uh biggest of Saturn's moons once
thought to be the largest moon in the
solar system if you read any of the late
Sir Patrick Moore's books from the 60s
and 70s it has this as the largest
that's because it has an atmosphere and
what we're looking at is the cloud tops
here full of that orange smog of organic
matter very interesting from the point
of view of the potential for some sort
of weird alien life maybe um but uh that
a quick trip to Saturn and just a look
at Titan we can't go through all the
rest of the moons but they are extremely
interesting um in many cases so you can
see here we've got Saturn and Venus very
close to each other just on that orange
line of the plane of the solar system
there and we scrolled forward here um
letting time move onwards and they've
now disappeared and set so we'll go up
over to this part of the sky and take a
look at Jupiter also shining very bright
in the night sky at the moment not as
bright as Venus but still brighter than
any of the Stars again this is the sort
of view you would get with an amateur
telescope uh with the planet there with
the two Cloud belts across the middle
and the four large moons that were
discovered by Galileo if we Zoom right
in on the planet though we can see in
more detail we get much more detail of
the cloud belts and the North and South
darker polar regions some Bluey gray
barges just below one of the belts there
and quite a number of spots now the
famous Great Red Spot is on the other
side of the planet at a particular time
that I chose so we don't see it this is
the first moon out this is IO looks a
bit like a pizza but it's not cheese all
those colors the white black yellow and
orange are different forms of sulfur
depending on how fast you cool sulfur it
gives you versions with uh different
chemical makeup different molecule
structure and different
colors so moving on we get to
Europa and this is covered not in Sulfur
but in ice um and you can see lots of
grooves and cracks on the surface there
that's where material is coming up from
an ocean of water underneath the ice and
there's possibility that there is life
in the oceans of Europa there's actually
more water there than all the oceans of
the earth right
amazing the largest moon in the solar
system is in fact this one this is gany
meat just bigger than Titan and this is
covered in a few craters and a lot of
glassiers and grooves all sorts of
interesting geology going on there and
again a lot of water uh possibly Frozen
but probably some reservoirs of liquid
water trapped underneath the ice there
and then the fourth large Moon Kalisto
slightly smaller than ganime um pot
marked with lots of craters again ice on
the surface and the craters are showing
up as very white where they've exposed
fresh new ice so pull back away from
Jupiter again that's sitting neatly on
that line marking out where we find the
planets because it's the plane of the
solar system but now we're going to go
to some of the constellations I picked
out at the beginning uh this is the
queen copia high above our heads nicely
placed to observe and with a bit of the
Milky Way running right through it so
there's Queen copia to the left there
that's her daughter Andromeda and at the
top there pereus the hero they're all
part of the same uh series of myths and
legends from ancient times but if we
zoom in we've got lots of interesting
objects this is the Pac-Man nebula um
his mouth is the dark bit and he's sort
of fac ing downhill here um but it does
look very much like the uh the goblin
character from uh the arcade game
Pac-Man when you look at it through a
telescope U that red color that's the
glow from hydrogen gas ionized by the
radiation from new stars that have been
formed in the uh core of the nebula and
are radiating away furiously lighting it
all
up now over here between cassia and the
constellation of sephus the king an
interesting star
cluster Messier object number
52 uh this is uh a very nice little
object to find you will need a telescope
for this one and next to it another pink
nebula this one's the bubble nebula and
here there is indeed a hot young star
that's formed out of all that gas and
dust and it's blown a giant bubble in
space with its radiation pushing away
the remains of the leftover material and
blowing a
bubble we'll pull back away from that
cassop Pier there and move on to the
next Target we can see a bit of the
Milky Way running down the center lots
of other interesting objects actually in
this view here some other nebula um a
Galaxy or2 which we'll come on to as we
move along so we're going to swing over
here gone from copia to persus so from
the W of copia to the Y shape of persus
the
hero and Perseus is interesting for a
number of reasons there he is holding
the head of the Medusa that he's been
fighting and uh we're going to zoom in
on one or two of the nice little objects
so the first one really lies between
Perseus and
copia very nice object with a parab
binoculars this is the double cluster
this region is very rich in Stars it's
near to the Milky Way but here we've got
two star clusters now they appear to be
next to each other in space from our
point of view actually one's much
further away than the other and also
much
older just away from that we've got the
heart and the Soul nebula these again
are these pink hydrogen gas clouds lit
by the light of new stars that have been
formed there um and a very nice objects
to have a look at you will need quite a
dark sky to see these they're not the
brightest objects but very worth
tracking down if you do have uh the
chance to do
so so we're going to pull back and
scroll
on and we'll have a look at the next
constellation on the tour which I think
is the third of this particular Trio so
we've had copia we've had persus and now
we're going to look at Andromeda
Andromeda really is a line of four
bright stars in the sky um there are
others but the main four are picked out
in the stick diagram there and it's kind
of hard to see how they made that stick
diagram into a maiden chain to the Rock
but uh that's uh the way that the
ancient people came up with their
description and of course it's very
famous because it has a neighboring
Galaxy the Andromeda galaxy in it you
can see this with the naked eye as a
fuzzy patch it's the furthest object
that you can usually see with the naked
eye um about 2 and a half million light
years away and it's a little bit bigger
it's got more stars than the Milky Way
it's got about a trillion Stars which is
about double the number that we have and
um that's uh really quite a big Galaxy
it's got some little dwarf Galaxy
companions there's one right in the
center here um that is or biting around
Andromeda you can see in the main Galaxy
all those dirty dust Lanes where there's
lots of star forming material ready to
collapse and here's another of its
companions another slightly larger dwarf
Galaxy orbiting around the outside we
have a few of those we have the large
and small melenic clouds and a
collection of other small galaxies
trapped in orbit around the Milky Way um
and of course andrometer is coming
towards us bringing its
family with it and the two will merge
together the Andromeda and the Milky Way
at some point in the distant
future the third member of this group
that we're part of is this one
triangulum it's named because there were
three stars left over and they made a
constellation of the triangle just to
fill in a gap in the star map and this
galaxy is in that region um it's a face
on Galaxy nice spiral arms it's a bit
smaller than the Milky Way or the
Andromeda about one tenth of the mass
actually and so those three are all in a
group and are going to merge whereas the
other galaxies are much further away
here's one this one's 27 million light
years away so 10 times further away than
the Andromeda galaxy and again it's a
lovely illustration that it's a spiral
galaxy seen Edge on so it's rather like
two fried eggs back to back with a bulge
in the Middle where the yolks would be
and the spiral arms where the whites
would be and again you could see the
dark dust Lane carving through the
middle of
it that's called The Outer Limits Galaxy
named after the Sci-Fi uh series called
The Outer Limits from the 1950s and 60s
some of you may remember that some
perhaps not um it used that picture of
the uh galaxy in the credits hence the
name so we're now going to move on from
90000 p.m. through to midnight um so
that the uh Sky will rotate a bit more
um we're looking high up and to the
north here so we're seeing the right
hand side rising in the East and the
left hand side sinking a bit but we're
going to swing over and have a look at
the next planet on the tour and that's
Mars the red planet look very red in the
sky zoom in on it with a telescope and
you get quite a nice view it's quite a
small planet so you need a lot of
magnification um and uh it's well worth
it if you
do especially if you can put a filter in
there are various filters that greatly
enhance your view of uh Mars the green
Filter Works quite well but here we have
it we've zoomed right in on the right
hand side there there's a a volcano sat
on the desert floor of the orange Rusty
deserts and then we've got the darker
Highland regions um fascinating planet
entirely occupied by robots of course
because we've sent a number of robotic
probes there um well I say entirely who
knows there may be life Clinging On
underneath in the permafrost and in some
of the liquid reservoirs deep in Mars's
crust um it's highly probable that life
got started on Mars before it lost its
atmosphere to space and conditions
became uh very difficult for the the
surface so now we're going to have a
look at Taurus we've got the face of
Taurus the Bull with the enormous horns
there um the face making up that sort of
vshape and it's got the bright star
older Baron the red eye of the bull uh
which we're just pick out for you there
in the center and an interloper of
course that's Jupiter the really bright
thing just above the center there let's
zoom in a bit uh we can see Jupiter
towards the Middle top over here we've
got the pades the Seven Sisters this is
uh you can see about six seven or eight
stars with the naked eye depending on
your eyes and conditions but with
binoculars you might see 50 there's
1,500 Al together and a telescope will
reveal a lot of them but the field of
view will be only part of the cluster so
binoculars are best for looking at it
really just for enjoyment um because you
can get the whole thing into the field
of view uh so worth a worth a
look now if we swing over next to one of
the Stars that's at the tip of the horns
of Taurus we find the first object in
Charles messier's catalog M1 The Crab
Nebula this is the remains of a
supernova explosion seen by Chinese
astronomers in the sky in the year 1054
and around the rest of the world
actually there's evidence of it even in
rock art from North America from the
indigenous people there so so uh it was
seen widely and recorded uh now when we
look back we see the exploding shock
wave still getting bigger um time after
time we measure it and we can work back
and prove that it's the uh would have
been from the Supernova in
1054 now we'll look at my favorite
constellation of all and that is Orion
the hunter facing off against his
eternal foe Taurus in the sky
there we have it he's got his arm
stretched out with a club and he's
holding what appears in this artwork to
be an animal Pelt some people say it's a
shield or a bow but it's all matter of
opinion really top leftand corner of
Orion we find the Red Giant star bleers
um there's some debate about whether
this is about to explode anytime soon it
could be now or it could be in 500,000
years time it is at the end of its life
what we don't know about it is the
precise mass of it and that makes a big
difference because the bigger a star is
the more rapidly it burns all its Fuel
and explodes so uh we just don't know
quite when that one's going to go down
in the sword handle of Orion my favorite
object of all the Orion Nebula beautiful
through binoculars and the bigger the
telescope the more detail you can see
with this one it just gets better and
better
very bright Overexposed in the middle of
there there are four very bright stars
making up the trapezium and lighting up
a bubble in space of all of that uh
glowing gas and dust out of which uh
thousands of stars have been formed um
and their G gas will get blown away and
there'll be a new star cluster there
rather like the
pades now moving to the left hand side
of Orion's Belt here you can see the
three belt stars and alnac is the
leftand star but adjacent to that
there's a couple of nebula there's the
Horsehead nebula in the center and at
the top there the flame nebula the flame
nebula you can track down relatively
easily the horad nebula really quite a
difficult Target there's very faint
actually that glowing hydrogen gas in
the background is not the brightest and
so it's quite a difficult object to see
so don't be disappointed if you try and
find that and can't move on to something
else uh you might like to try the next
object on the tour which is just above a
rion's belt this is much easier to find
and brighter and this is um a reflection
nebula there's a band of dark Dusty
material blocking the view of a bright
young star and that star is sending out
lots of blue light which is then
bouncing back to us from a cloud of gas
Beyond so it's reflecting the light back
lots more objects to see in and around
or we could probably go on all night uh
but I've limited myself to uh just half
an hour on this tour and um so we're
probably uh going to just pull
back and let time run on forward again
but uh this will go on into the pre-dawn
sky and then the sun will come up and uh
that'll the end and we'll save the other
objects for another time so thanks very
much for taking a look and I hope you
enjoy that and I hope you can uh use it
to find some of those objects um in and
around the night sky for this January
and uh perhaps other times as well so
there we go there's a few of the other
constellations that are in the sky at
the uh in the pre-dawn sky but we'll
just uh end it there so thanks very much